For President Donald Trump, few things
appear to matter more than Tariffs.
Tariffs. Reciprocal tariffs. [music]
A lot of tariffs. The most beautiful
word in the dictionary is tariff. Now,
his signature policy has hit a
roadblock.
Trump's biggest legal defeat since
returning to the White House.
>> The Supreme Court striking down
President Trump's tariffs.
>> A major blow to President Trump's
economic agenda. Two-thirds of the
tariffs that President Trump implemented
in 2025 have essentially been ruled
illegal. That really has taken away one
of the main ways in which President
Trump has disrupted the global economy.
But Trump says he isn't backing down.
Today I will sign an order to impose a
10% global tariff under Section 122. A
day later, he upped the ante saying
he'll raise that rate to 15%. But these
can only stay in place for a maximum of
150 days. What he is going to have to do
now instead is use tariff authorities
>> [music]
>> that are much narrower and in which he
really has to prove an economic case for
the need for them. For US trading
partners around the world, it's causing
tariff whiplash all over again.
The EU was the quickest to react so far.
They have moved to freeze the
implementation of their side of the
trade deal that was signed with the US.
There are a few countries that actually
stand to lose despite facing lower
tariffs now than before the ruling. So,
countries like Vietnam, what [music]
they've lost is the comparative
advantage that they had relative to
China. China is probably [music] the
biggest winner from this ruling. Almost
all countries and corporations want to
keep the deal that they already made.
So, how will this affect businesses and
consumers or the trajectory of Trump's
remaining 3 years? And what happens when
the 150 days are over? We have maximum
[music] uncertainty over where trade
policy goes from here.
>> [music]
>> This wasn't a battle before the Supreme
Court between [music] President Trump
and China or a faceless corporation. The
main plaintiffs who challenged these
tariffs were a toy company, Learning
Resources, and a whole coalition of
other small businesses who really felt
like President Trump and his tariffs
were an existential threat to their
businesses.
At the center of the fight was a law
called the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act, IEEPA. It allows a
president to regulate some aspects of
commerce after declaring a national
emergency. Trump claimed that it gave
him the power to immediately put a
tariff of any level on goods from
anywhere, and the Supreme Court ruled
that that just wasn't the case. What the
court didn't make clear is what happens
to the money already collected.
Essentially, the Supreme Court ruled
that the US collected $170 billion
in tariffs unconstitutionally.
Trump himself has indicated that this is
going to take years of litigation
[music] to calculate and distribute
refunds. There is a possibility that it
could just be a very clean process. The
Customs and Border Protection knows who
paid the tariffs and knows how to refund
them.
>> There have been episodes where tariffs
have been refunded in the past. That's
not unprecedented. That's not unheard
of. But the scale of this, I think, is
unprecedented. Think of it as the mother
of all tax refunds. Trump had promised
[music] that foreign countries would be
the ones paying for his tariffs. But
as it turns out, the foreign exporters
aren't eating the tariffs. They're
90-95%
passed through to US importers and their
customers. Reducing the US trade deficit
was one of Trump's stated goals with
tariffs, but in truth, they barely moved
the needle. The United States last year
in 2025
had a trade deficit in goods of around
$1.2 trillion.
It was almost exactly the same size as
the trade deficit that it had in 2024.
The main impact we saw from the tariffs
was to reshuffle trade away from China
and towards Mexico and other Asian
countries more than reducing the
aggregate trade deficit.
And so far, Trump's trade policies have
failed to deliver on another long-held
promise, rekindling US manufacturing.
Trade policies
will return significant manufacturing
jobs to our country.
The problem so far for President Trump
is that 10 years on, the situation in
manufacturing doesn't look that much
better. In fact, in the last year, the
US lost more than 80,000 manufacturing
jobs. That's even as these tariffs went
into place. A lot of manufacturers will
lie on imported components, and if those
imported components and big things that
they use like steel and aluminum are
more expensive as a result of tariffs,
they can't hire more people.
>> [music]
>> They can't grow. The costs are just
higher. More tellingly, if we separate
that industrial production into
industries that faced higher than
average tariffs and lower than average
tariffs, we see that any growth that was
there was really driven by the lower
tariffed industries, things like
pharmaceuticals, electronics. Whereas
the higher tariffed industries, think
autos and metal sectors, faced much
slower production growth. Manufacturing
is no longer going to be a big source of
employment. The jobs that have gone,
most those jobs are not coming back. The
principal driver of that trend is not
trade, it's technology.
But it's Trump's foreign policy, not
domestic, that now may need to change
the most. The biggest blow to Trump from
the Supreme Court decision is really how
it hits his ability [music]
to shape geopolitics in the world. He's
used tariffs to threaten India and its
purchase of Russian oil.
>> They will [music] not be buying oil from
Russia. He's used the threat of tariffs
to also
interfere in domestic politics, like in
Brazil. [music] Those are all things he
was able to do because of this authority
he claimed [music]
that gave him this kind of immediate
ability to increase his leverage to
apply pressure on other countries.
But that may have backfired.
I don't think there's anything wrong by
any means with an American president
seeking American advantage. That's the
job. The question is, are these methods
working? So, if you think of Europe, if
you think of Canada in particular,
governments
are weak in many ways in relation to the
US. The demands that the US is making
are so off the charts in terms of their
previous experience. I think they're
struggling to process it. You know, can
we rely on the US commitment in NATO?
The controversy that followed the
president's demands about Greenland. We
want a piece of ice for world
protection. There were Europeans who are
actually wondering whether at some point
European soldiers would be fighting US
soldiers. Extraordinary.
All of this is happening in the run-up
to the US [music] midterm elections.
Poll after poll shows that these tariffs
are incredibly unpopular and that people
associate them with this broader issue
of affordability. It's just another way
that they see the government making life
harder, raising prices. [music]
Republicans should be asking themselves
if they want to keep backing this
policy, which is just meeting obstacle
after obstacle when it comes [music] to
implementation.
Trump wants Republicans to win the
midterm elections. It's going to be
harder for them to do so if a lot of
voters don't like his signature economic
policy.
And it's something the Republican Party
can't ignore since Congress has to
approve extending tariffs once these
first 150 days are up.
A budget reckoning is looming
exacerbated by the possibility of the
government issuing tariff [music]
refunds.
One of the big issues going forward is
going to be the fiscal implications.
Huge sums of money are involved. And if
that goes away because of refunds, then
that's a new hole in the budget [music]
deficit outlook. One of the major
policies implemented last year was the
continuation of tax [music] cuts and
other expansionary fiscal policies that
would otherwise raise the fiscal deficit
and [music]
the administration was really counting
on this revenue from the tariffs to plug
that fiscal hole and [music] finance the
fiscal deficit.
But even with tariffs, the numbers don't
add up. With the exception of the
Clinton [music] era, the US has been
running deficits steadily. The pandemic
required massive government spending and
the tariffs introduced since Trump's
first term have made a dent, but the
trend is the same with the annual
deficit still hovering near $2 trillion.
dollars.
The public debt was on track to keep
increasing in relation to the size of
the economy.
If you take the tariffs away, that
fiscal gap gets very much bigger, very
much bigger. Then the question becomes,
is the bond market going to be okay with
that?
The bigger worry is [music] this growing
sense of unease about the United States,
and that that erodes over time the power
of the dollar as the world's great
reserve currency. And that essentially,
investors around the world slowly lose
confidence in the United States.
That loss of confidence is being fueled
by Trump's disdain for some of the
institutions [music] behind America's
perceived strength, like the Federal
Reserve, and now the Supreme Court.
This isn't the last time the Supreme
Court is going to weigh in on President
Trump's use of presidential powers or
his invocation of emergency powers.
This is the beginning of a broader
potential conflict that has enormous
ramifications
for the United States, its governance,
the state of democracy, and the
Constitution.